hi everyone my name is Shah I wanted to
thank you no Josette Barry Chris
Stephanie everyone had gray area for
inviting me to do this and thank you
guys for coming out it's really an honor
to be here I know I know an embarrassing
number of you here today um so this has
been a pretty nerve-racking talk to
prepare for it in many ways y'all are
family right all it's so incredibly
smart and talented y'all have way better
taste in music than me and
my life as some of you know just makes
no sense I want to talk a little
bit about that today since leaving the
city I've been working on two main
threads two main lines of work one is
running gift pop a project Rachel Binks
who's going to be on a panel later
project I Rachel and I built almost two
years ago we were highly influenced by
Golan Levin and Pablo Garcia the words
they said the projects they did we
talked about previous work that they
were building that they were building
products as provocations for us for gift
pop and our previous project measure
that meant building the the thinnest
possible layer of a business around what
was essentially an art project her gift
pop that project was printing gifts on
demand on two animated lenticular prints
printing the material of the internet
and the question we've been trying to
provoke was this what would the world
look like if artists got paid for their
work we've worked with many artists now
selling editions of their work and
giving them eighty percent of the
profits it's been exciting work to
cultivate
we've supported exhibitions and
installations all over the world we've
helped artists and students whole
digital work out into the real we've
watched artists like Joe winograd go
even further play with the material
itself as its own medium creating
sculptures and jewelry's cutting these
prints together and so wild to watch
yeah the other thread i've been pursuing
has been working with the government in
december of 2013 i was asked to join a
team of folks working out of a hotel in
maryland to fix healthcare.gov and i've
been working with them ever since
carving up whole swathes of the website
it has been without a doubt the most
important work that I will ever
contribute to in my life has been
exhausting and maddening at times but it
has also been intensely humbling people
that I've worked with both from the tech
surge and the government have been
continuously inspiring though by now it
seems like years and years ago that we
started the changes that we've been able
to enact have actually affected millions
of Americans taken together though
projects make absolutely no sense I
actually tried to draw the Venn diagram
of working with gifts and working with
the government but all I got was was
this there is no there is no
intersection in the content of these
projects they exist in very different
worlds but what I'd like to do today is
wander through some of the thoughts i've
been having around infrastructure and
culture and tech in this city up
have been spurred by a few recent facts
that uber has absorbed a research lab at
CMU to work on their self driving car at
the median rent in San Francisco has
cost 4200 a month while meanwhile in San
Francisco are they in the Bay Area the
homeless population remains incredibly
steady at around 35,000 there is any
commonality at all in my work it is my
interest in the analysis and the design
of systems what I'm interested in is the
building of platforms a design at the
scale of infrastructure
took a break last summer see a very
different kind of infrastructure it was
an expedition run by kate davies and
liam young a studio they called the
unknown fields division our goal was to
trace the supply chain that we so
desperately depend on these days to
examine and encounter the infrastructure
and systems that support us we sailed
from Saigon to Hong Kong on this ship
gonna Hilda mask a ship larger than the
Transamerica building I held hundreds of
thousands of tons of cargo and had a
crew all told of 15 people what I kept
thinking about on the trip was the steps
that brought us to this infrastructure
that we rely on these days how
containerization was an example of
technology enabling both the things we
take for granted today while
simultaneously erasing an entire class
of work up until the 60s we shipped
goods through a method called break bulk
shipping longshoremen on the docks
loading and unloading cargo varying
sizes dock workers lives were both
unique and exhausting their hourly raged
there though their hourly wages were
generally much higher than the local
averages their shifts were irregular
most dock workers enjoyed the
flexibility if on a random day a
longshoreman chose to fish rather than
work they were free to do so and it's
funny but not surprising to see echoes
of today's on-demand labor in these
sentiments but when
the standardized shipping container
system was born a product both of
Malcolm McLean seal and corporation on
the East Coast and San Francisco's own
matson corporation the entire dock
worker class was threatened and a huge
debate emerged it's important to note
that the concerns that automation raised
during that time weren't just local ones
they were national and the conflicts
that resulted were fierce and fractured
but the labor unions were able to form
an incredibly strong and ongoing
resistance two major agreements were
reached between the shipping companies
and the dock workers in the early 60s in
the Bay Area the mechanization and
modernization agreement forced shipping
companies to pay five million dollars a
year into funds to provide for early
retirement disability benefits and wage
supplements for the displaced
longshoremen on the East Coast the ILA
the international longshoremen's
association was able to negotiate a
royalty payment on every container
passing through New York using the funds
to pay longshoremen a guaranteed annual
income which would be paid for each
qualified longshoreman until their
retirement there's a huge victory at the
time but these agreements that started
in the bay area and New York are now
seen as end of rare exceptions in this
country the idea that employers pushing
for automation needed to distribute
profits to the people who are automated
away has evaporated as and so have the
jobs
just ten years after these agreements
longshore labor went from over a million
jobs to under a hundred thousand new
ports were constructed in both alameda
and new york and new jersey to
accommodate the larger container ships
and they took the industry with them in
New York the industrial and maritime
work that emptied from the shores of
Brooklyn made room for the
neighborhood's we're all familiar with
today like Williamsburg Dumbo Red Hook
there there are no simple stories here I
can't argue that shipping containers
should still be loaded by hand nor can I
argue that the dock workers unions
always acted in good faith there are
many factors that influence the shape
and the weight of city centres and
containerization was only one of them
but I think of this a lot when I visit
San Francisco these days because I have
sort of a personal history here went to
school at Berkeley studied architecture
and afterwards I lived in the mission
for five years I was lucky enough to be
at stamen and help make work for a gray
areas first show in the Tenderloin but I
don't and and though I don't live here
anymore I've watched the city continue
to lean in on tech the San Francisco we
have today is a surreal one fueled by
services both social and infrastructural
subsidized by venture capital which
itself is fueled by money from sources
like pension funds insurance companies
endowments and foundations and this
not news to you all but sometimes I
forget sometimes I forget that uber now
has more than 20,000 drivers in the Bay
Area something like 15,000 drivers in
San Francisco the only company that
employs more people in the Bay Area
actually as Kaiser sometimes I forget
that the word unicorn meant not too long
ago a designer who could code hey yeah
not a billion-dollar company and
sometimes I forget that magic sunrise
karma and clear were words at all not
companies even even is a company now and
I i ah and it is weird and dizzying how
fast companies grow these days but
what's really fascinating to me is that
what this has done to culture and art to
borrow a dime axion phrasing technology
weirds culture we're long past the
fervor of modernism the emotional
distance of post-modernism we are fully
in a state of mainstream meta modernism
a constant oscillation between
enthusiasm and irony between fascination
and discussed taken this way culture and
technology have hyper cubed holding
multiple positions at the same time in
our perceptions all at one all at once
Ness applied not just to a density but
also to effect we can see this
manifest as a physics of the internet
that any popular enough ad campaign will
have an equal and opposite reaction gif
and its corollary that any popular
enough meme will end up co-opted by a
brand in some way the time it takes to
close this zoo loop is increasingly zero
Ryan Gosling's recent tribute to the
Ryan Gosling won't eat his cereal vines
that Ryan McHenry made was a hilarious
continuation a touching memorial a smart
marketing play and and and an intense
context collapse all at the same time
it's yeah we can
a staff here is them and and any this is
not unique right any new neck any new
technology built these days faces this
immediate use misuse and creative abuse
delivery pizza customization offered
options have both been co-opted into
memes where pizza order none pizza with
left beef um as well as used for a way
to women to send a secret message to
call for 911 boyfriend held her and her
kids hostage in their home not just
tools that can be co-opted in Lauren
McCarthy's residency in San Francisco
last year she produced an app called
crowd pilot building on much of her own
previous work but packaged as a fun new
app for crowdsourcing advice on social
interactions because it was built and
presented and packaged as a fun new app
it was hyped and critiqued as such it
got a lot of mainstream press attention
it was on all the tech blogs I find this
amazing what what crowd pilot says to me
this project is that startup is
something you perform it's true crowd
pilot is built on the same tools and
technologies that most iOS developers
use all that differentiates crowd pilot
from the inevitable startup that will
offer the same functionality is the use
of borrowed money as leverage towards
scale leverage as
mentioned yesterday is that extra weight
you have whether through network effects
or cash in the bank it's what allows
companies to force their way through
environments full of incredible amounts
of friction the power of scale is what
Facebook uses to lower publications to
give their content up for the sake of
instant loading leverage as well as
greed is what allows companies like uber
to offer partnerships with lenders
signing up drivers into multiple year
leases that they then have to pay back
by driving for uber leverage is what
allows companies like uber to reinvent
sharecropping and it's easy to get angry
in all of this and call for protest but
I don't think protest is the right word
for it protest is disapproval protest is
the first step a necessary one surely
but there is so much more work
afterwards we know of course that
networks and systems are not neutral but
it is important to recognize that our
actions aren't are not neutral either we
are politicized whether we engage
whether we ignore or whether we leave
and protests does not adequately
describe the incredible persistence of
people like Josette and the gray area
family over these long years the
institutional work that Eric is helping
to do with cast or even the hard work of
The Da Cruz unions 50 years ago protests
does
adequately describe the quiet and
constant day-to-day work of supporting
friends or patiently arguing for empathy
at work the word I like is resistance
lobbyists woods and architect and
professor who taught at the Cooper Union
in New York defined resistance as a
measured struggle that is more tactical
than strategic it's from something he
wrote a few years before he died called
architecture and resistance and I'd like
to just end by reading a couple pieces
of it as much for you as it is for
myself to hear resistance is not
that can be improvised at the barricades
it takes time and a lot of trial and
error this is only just because the
things to be resisted have not come from
nowhere they have a history built over a
period of time a kind of seriousness and
weight that makes them a threat to begin
with they can only be resisted by ideas
and actions of equal substance and
momentum resist whatever feels
inevitable resist people who seem
invincible resist the hope that you'll
get that big job resist getting big jobs
resist taking the path of least
resistance resist the panicky feeling
that you are alone resist the desire to
move to a different city resist the
notion that you should never compromise
resist that feeling of utter exhaustion
this the illusion that it is ever
complete